

Chavez2009 - a core regulatory network of OCT4 in human embryonic stem cells

A core OCT4-regulated network has been identified as a test case, to analyase
stem cell characteristics and cellular differentiation.

This model is described in the article:

[In silico identification of a core regulatory network of OCT4 in human
embryonic stem cells using an integrated
approach.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/19604364)

Chavez L, Bais AS, Vingron M, Lehrach H, Adjaye J, Herwig R

BMC Genomics, 2009, 10:314

Abstract:

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor OCT4 is highly expressed in pluripotent
embryonic stem cells which are derived from the inner cell mass of mammalian
blastocysts. Pluripotency and self renewal are controlled by a transcription
regulatory network governed by the transcription factors OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG.
Recent studies on reprogramming somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem
cells highlight OCT4 as a key regulator of pluripotency.

RESULTS: We have carried out an integrated analysis of high-throughput data
(ChIP-on-chip and RNAi experiments along with promoter sequence analysis of
putative target genes) and identified a core OCT4 regulatory network in human
embryonic stem cells consisting of 33 target genes. Enrichment analysis with
these target genes revealed that this integrative analysis increases the
functional information content by factors of 1.3 - 4.7 compared to the
individual studies. In order to identify potential regulatory co-factors of
OCT4, we performed a de novo motif analysis. In addition to known validated
OCT4 motifs we obtained binding sites similar to motifs recognized by further
regulators of pluripotency and development; e.g. the heterodimer of the
transcription factors C-MYC and MAX, a prerequisite for C-MYC transcriptional
activity that leads to cell growth and proliferation.

CONCLUSION: Our analysis shows how heterogeneous functional information can be
integrated in order to reconstruct gene regulatory networks. As a test case we
identified a core OCT4-regulated network that is important for the analysis of
stem cell characteristics and cellular differentiation. Functional information
is largely enriched using different experimental results. The de novo motif
discovery identified well-known regulators closely connected to the OCT4
network as well as potential new regulators of pluripotency and
differentiation. These results provide the basis for further targeted
functional studies.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1305010000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1305010000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

